Aotearoa, kaitiakitanga, mana whenua.
Thank you.
you
coming at three. We know you're deliberating it.
you can hear me. If you could please accept the invitation to be a panelist, to be a panelist that's coming through from the committee. That'd be great.
Great.
it's tasteful.
it's
a panelist or not?
Hi, Hillary, can you hear me?
I can hear you. Can you hear me?
We can. We can. Fantastic. Hey, look, we've got five minutes and it goes pretty quickly, so, and you can take your submission as read. So if you want to leave some time for questions, that would be fantastic.
Awesome. No worries. So first of all, my name's Hillary Pritchard. I'm born and bred in New Zealand. I go back about 13 generations. Our family come from orchards or farming as such.
And environmental has been in our life for a long time. I'm 46 as it is. I've been fishing since I was a little kid. And you can clearly see that our oceans are struggling. I am dumbfounded after the video cameras of deep sea trawling have been released that a country so beautiful as ours and the rules and the regulations that we use in our country are even contemplating letting that into our sea waters.
I think deep sea trawling just destroys everything and anything in that environment. And I don't think it's fair to us or to our next future generations that we allow businesses to come in and do that.
I think a lot in this bill is wrong. And I think none of it is there to protect the oceans or to protect us as New Zealanders.
I don't think allowing fishing companies or commercial fishing companies to be able to pull over to the next year or roll over their fish so that they can catch more of the limit or downsizing the fish is the solution out of this problem.
I think we need to have a look into our oceans more and understand what is going on, how we can do this more sustainable so we can bring in fishing into New Zealand.
It does make a lot of money. It is an extremely fun thing and all of us as humans and New Zealanders should be entitled to be able to do that.
I think one of the other things that I'd like to bring up is that for the long-term effect of trawling we don't actually know what's going to happen.
So I think to allow something like that and just hope that we can correct it in the long-term is just silly.
I am a big believer of doing a no-fish for quite a few years, but I also understand that's unrealistic.
But our oceans are very important and the bottom of the ocean with the sea corals and the environments and the ecosystems is definitely something that we need to protect.
I'm happy with a couple of questions and then I'm quite happy to say my best.
Oh no, if you've still got more to say you go for it.
I have a whole lot more poise.
I think we all understand as well that we've seen deep sea trawling around the world.
We've seen the effect that it can have. The byproducts for instance with sailfish.
Once we increase those all of a sudden we had more being increased to the bio to the bycatchers, which I think as well is a massive problem.
I don't think game fish should be anywhere near commercial fishing or allowed.
And for any New Zealander who's seen any footage of the cameras that is on those trawling nets, I would be shocked that anybody would think that it's a great idea to do in our waters.
I think it's money that we could invest into the fishing company.
We need information that we need to know.
And I think as well that we could amend, like just demolish the bull until we do figure out what is going on in our oceans.
I think a fair part of being New Zealand is being able to just catch a fishing rod and go out and catch a few fish for your kai moana and bring it home.
Reducing the legal size limit of fish in an area to me suggests that that area is possibly outfished.
I don't know how it would make sense to just start fishing smaller ones as I think taking away the babies or the breeders is obviously going to deplete.
There's fish in that area.
I think that's a very scary thing to have in our waters.
I also believe that our oceans themselves being so close to Antarctica and where we are.
I know that we are polluted.
I know that we have all the problems that the rest of the world does as well.
As New Zealanders, I'm kind of hoping that we all do the right thing and realise that we should be protecting our oceans in any form that we can.
And fish, corals, everything that's even at the bottom of the ocean, the microorganisms, the ecosystems, it's all as important as it is out here.
We do enough on our lands with protecting ecosystems.
I think we need to start doing it now in our oceans.
When you can follow people like Matt Watson who really do make a change in New Zealand and make you question what the laws and the rules and what should be going on and you look at somebody who's lived off seafood for a long time and moved to a beautiful place in Northland.
For him to be fine and everybody else to be fine.
You can't catch any crayfish for the next five years so the population can come back.
That's amazing that we can do that as people and as humans.
So let's keep those trawlers out, get them out of our country, change this bill, listen to all the New Zealanders and realise that this is not a smart idea for New Zealand.
Fantastic. Thank you so much for your time, Hilary, and for your submission. We really appreciate it.
Awesome. Have a great day.
You too. Ka kite.
Ka kite.
Okay, Terence, Robert, Harper.
He gets called Robert, obviously.
There we are.
Oh, is it Terence or Robert?
Terence. My official first name is Robert though, but I go as Terence.
Okay, fantastic. Hi, Terence. Hey look, we've got five minutes, which goes pretty quickly.
So you want to leave time for questions, then keep your opening statements pretty brief and we have read your submission.
Fantastic. Thank you. So Kia ora and thank you very much for listening to me today. My name is Terence Harper.
I live on the North Shore here in Auckland with my wife and four kids.
And I'm here today because of my love and passion for the ocean and to emphasise to you that the ocean is a resource valued by people of all nationalities and all cultures.
And that it's our collective responsibility to protect it for future generations.
I'm here to express my total opposition to this bill and request that the whole bill is thrown out and not progressed further.
While it's stated to grow the value of the seafood sector exports, I believe we should be a country leading the world in environmental protection,
not one that is going backwards and prioritise a short-term commercial gain at the cost of long-term ecological and economic health.
If enacted, I feel you're destroying our New Zealand ocean for my children and for future generations.
I can be a little bit more specific about some of the items in the bill, deeply concerned about simplifying and making a more responsive management system.
This I feel can lead to changing catch limits really quickly to suit market conditions, but ultimately they will decimate those fish stocks,
which are actually long-term things that need to be sorted. The biological reality of marine generation is long-term.
Also, formally oppose the amendment to revoke minimum size limits for those 10 different fish.
I feel it's scientifically illogical to take smaller fish before they've had a chance and an opportunity to spawn.
I also want to advocate for unifying a standard for catch, for commercial and recreational, to have one rule for commercial,
for example, snapper 25 centimetres, yet for recreational 30 centimetres is in my view illogical,
and we need to allow the time for those fish to breed and replenish in our waters.
I also want to formally oppose the barriers to transparency and justice.
If fishing boats are operating in international waters or New Zealand waters,
they should be allowed to have full public scrutiny of their operations.
If they're doing nothing wrong, they have nothing to hide.
And so if they're wanting to hide what they're doing, it feels to the public that they've got something to hide.
So we should be able to view those cameras at any time via the OIA.
Also allowing more than 20 days to get the evidence together and get a lawyer and stuff to oppose breaches,
I think we need to keep allowing.
I also want to formally oppose allowing bycatch to be dumped at sea, effectively legalising dumping.
90% of our catch is exported for profit overseas, and yet many New Zealanders face food insecurity.
I advocate for a no dumping policy where every fish caught is brought to port.
If it cannot be sold under the quota system, for example, they are too small,
they should be donated to local charities and food banks to feed our own communities.
This would also incentivise commercial fishing to target the right size fish,
because if they're catching a boatload or a hull worth of undersized fish,
they can't sell it, that's bad economically.
So this incentivises them to catch the right size fish.
So my feeling in conclusion, the ocean is a shared resource that must be managed with the vision beyond the next fiscal quarter.
Short-term commercial gains that decimate our stocks will inevitably lead to long-term economic failure.
I urge this committee and to lead New Zealand towards genuine environmental protection,
prioritising local food security over commercial flexibility.
Thank you, and I welcome any questions.
Thank you very much, Heron.
Yeah, thank you. Does anyone have any questions?
Joe, any questions?
No, I think it was a really clear submission.
Yeah, tried to keep it nice and tight, so I know you have a lot to do through today.
Yeah, excellent. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thanks for hearing me. All the best for the rest of the sessions.
You're welcome.
Hi, Candice. Hi.
Kia ora. Kia ora.
So you've got five minutes. If you want to leave time for questions, that's entirely up to you.
And yeah, this floor is yours. Thank you.
So look, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I strongly oppose the Fisheries Amendment Bill.
And in doing so, I've got four key concerns that, in my view, go to the heart of what this bill represents
and why it shouldn't proceed.
So firstly, I believe the bill is moving against the flow of the global tide.
It represents a clear regression, in my view, in New Zealand's environmental management.
If we look internationally, responsible countries and unions are strengthening protections, not weakening them.
This includes the EU, our Pacific nations, and Australia.
Globally, governments, including this one, have committed to protect at least 30% of the ocean
and to minimise the impacts of fishing on ecosystems through the Global Ocean Treaty.
The common global theme is better protection, more selective fishing methods, and stronger oversight.
New Zealand's built its identity on being clean, green, and environmentally responsible.
But I believe that this bill moves us in the opposite direction.
It reduces scrutiny, it weakens the safeguards,
and it fails to address the real issue of indiscriminate fishing methods.
So I believe that the bill's not just out of step with international best practice.
It's actually out of step with what we say we stand for as New Zealanders.
Secondly, in restricting access to information and onboard camera footage,
the bill removes public scrutiny. Now that's a backward step.
Transparency is fundamental to public trust.
It will mean that there's no meaningful accountability.
We know from experience that transparency and monitoring changes behaviour.
If we remove that transparency and public scrutiny,
I believe it will undermine compliance and create an even greater sense of mistrust
in our commercial fishing industry.
Thirdly, the proposal to allow the capture and retention of undersized fish
is a significant step away from sustainability.
The purpose of size limits is straightforward, to ensure that fish can reach maturity
and breed before they are caught.
By allowing the landing and capture and sale of previously discarded fish,
you will only encourage the catching of undersized or non-target species.
It will increase the by-catch.
We now know that the EU's own landing policy has not driven the behavioural change
that they had hoped for.
So our regulatory focus should be on reducing the by-catch, not increasing it.
Fourthly and in my view most importantly, this bill fails to address the real issue,
the non-selective and discriminate fishing methods.
Large scale methods such as bottom trawling and other non-selective techniques
capture juvenile fish before they breed.
They result in significant by-catch of non-target species
and they damage our marine habitats that are essential for sustaining fish populations.
But this bill does nothing to address that.
Instead it makes it easier to deal with the consequences of indiscriminate fishing.
And that's the wrong focus.
I've seen over the course of my lifetime the significant depletion of fish stocks
in the Hauraki Gulf and elsewhere.
And my view is that this bill will exacerbate that.
We now know more than ever the importance of protecting our marine ecosystem
to ensure the health of our planet.
This bill is not based on sustainability objectives.
It's not based on sustainability objectives or on the protections that are required,
which should be the focus of modern day fisheries reform.
It's designed purely to increase profitability for a few.
And it does appear manifestly corrupt.
So I'm calling for a different approach.
Rather than weakening safeguards, I believe that we should be strengthening
monitoring and transparency.
We should be maintaining protections that allow fish to reproduce.
And most importantly, to undertake an inquiry into how the commercial sector
can transition towards a more selective fishing method.
And I think we can look to Australia for that.
So in closing, this bill is not just a technical reform.
It's a signal about what we value.
Do we value short-term profit for a few or long-term sustainability that will benefit all?
So I'm urging the committee to reject the bill in its current form
and instead to pursue reforms that genuinely protect our oceans, our fisheries,
and the interests of our future generations.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your comprehensive and heartfelt summation, Candice.
I appreciate your time today.
You're in Winsdale?
Winsley.
Oh, Winsley. Winsdale.
Sorry.
Oh, good. So you can hear me and see me?
Yes, Erin. Hi.
Hi.
So yeah, I mean, I filled out the submission.
I used to be a fisheries observer.
So I've got quite a good first-hand knowledge of New Zealand commercial fisheries.
And it was common knowledge when I was an observer that boats that had observers
caught more birds and discarded more fish
than boats without observers.
And it's common knowledge.
But why is that?
Because fishermen are incentivized to not necessarily tell the truth all the time.
And so a big problem I have with this bill is the camera footage,
I think needs to be available to the public.
Because the fishers need to be held accountable.
So that's the main issue I have.
And the other problem I have is with the undersized fish,
I think potentially, you know, they're just creating a market for these fish,
maybe even incentivized catching them.
So I think that would be a backward step.
So yeah, those are the main two issues I have.
Yeah, and if you have any questions.
I do, Sose.
Yes, thank you, Joe. Joe likes to hear the question.
Thank you, Erin.
So you just said boats that had observers caught more birds
and those that didn't have observers didn't.
How does that, can you just explain how that works, please?
Well, they weren't being reported.
But unless an observer was on board, the fishers went reporting seabird bycatch.
And that's what happens.
So you said that those then.
So can I just check so that you...
So the ones that did have observers, as I heard you say, caught more birds.
Or did you mean those that had observers didn't catch more birds?
No, no, the ones that had observers reported a higher rate of catching seabirds.
Okay, and the reason for that is because the observers were reporting them.
The boats that didn't have observers.
Yeah, okay.
So, yeah, thank you.
Yeah, thank you.
Thanks, Erin.
Miles Anderson has a question as well.
Thanks for your submission, Erin.
About the market, you're talking about the market for undersized fish.
Could you expand on that a bit?
Well, I mean, I think cakefish, for example.
I mean, illegal cakefish is, you know, for a recreational person, 75 centimetres,
which is quite a big fish.
So you could easily...
A 50 or 60 centimetre cakefish would be quite a nice size fish for the table.
So, yeah, you could easily create a market.
I mean, if you go somewhere like Japan where these fish are actually found,
that's a common size.
Yep.
You'll see in a second.
Other species that you could think of as well.
They farm snapper too.
So, you know, I could easily imagine a smaller fish like that.
You don't have to...
You know, especially with a lot of immigrants in New Zealand,
they cook fish differently.
They'll often just cook at home.
So I think if they're fishing...
Fish are meant to be fishing to make money.
That's their job.
So any way that they can make as much money as they can,
they will.
And we shouldn't be surprised,
but we need to make sure that
they don't...
Their interests aren't quite ahead of the interests of the New Zealand public.
Thank you.
So I've just got to kind of a suck on that.
So would you be more inclined to support that part of the legislation
if they were still required to bring in the undersized catch
but they weren't allowed to sell it?
But still, it came in so it was quite against their quota
but they didn't have a right to sell it.
Yes.
Thank you.
Thanks very much for your time, Erin.
That was really helpful.
OK, thank you.
Take care.
OK, bye.
Mia Elliott.
We're nearly ready for you, Matthew.
No.
You've been very patient.
Hello.
She's interested in taking over the video with me.
Just go to my microphone.
Oh, yes.
Can hear you.
And if you want to turn your camera on, you're welcome to.
Oh, there.
There we go.
Fantastic.
Hi.
Right.
You've got five minutes.
The floor is yours.
Cool.
My name is Mia.
I'm from Taupanoa Teah College.
2012. I strongly oppose this bill. There's a lot of things I've been talking, thinking
about with it and it's just so many things that aren't quite right. There's, it's just,
I might not be experienced as everyone else who's come into the table and I know you've
already sat through many amazing people's voices and hearing their viewpoints but what
I do have is a voice and I have another viewpoint. I'm a generation that is
dealing with this and I have to grow up with these issues that have been put
into our world and the next generation Aura Angatahi, they have to deal with this.
They have to grow into it up and with what we're putting in, what we're
planning putting in place and little kids they believe what we tell them. They
don't have that wrong or right thing yet. The bill is being promoted as a
solution to fish wastage but it could actually increase the amount of
wastage in commercial fisheries. Critics believe this bill prioritizes the
commercial fishing interest over the long-term health of marine ecosystems.
If we let this bill go through we're actually not letting anyone get a
say in. So as soon as the bill goes through no one gets a say. The minister
can increase the catchment as much as he want without even consulting anyone
which in turn is going to strip our oceans of their natural wonders. This
bill introduces multi-year catch limits which changes fish populations, it produces
environmental pressures and also it will crumple our natural ecosystems way of
life. When we have with all our bottom trawling that's happening and that if we
let this bill go through we're allowing bottom trawling to continue and strip
the bottoms of our oceans away. We're saying that we're going to allow
undersized fish to be catch which is pretty bad and even if we are letting go
of these sharks and rays that we throw off our boats they're still dying. We're
actually pulling up heaps of coral, heaps of their natural environments as
we're doing this bottom trawling and then we're just leaving waste in our
wake. We're saying oh yes well no we're getting money from it. Well that's not
the problem. I don't know this bill makes me feel like it's
profit over people. I don't see much human input, I don't see much thought into
you know what we think about it. Think about the multi values where we would
fish from the seas, explore them, not exploit them. Our Amawana they are a gift
they're not something we can use to get money that's not how it works. We're also
one thing if we stop, if we use this bill then we're allowing us people to
people of New Zealand to have no view into what's actually happening because
you're banning us from being able to see existing camera footage. So if something's
going on, something's wrong and it's videoed we can't see that, we can't argue
about it, we don't get a say. You're moving the environmental safeguards, weakening
the environments just to build this law and
you need to, I feel this bill needs to consider the future generations and I
understand that the fisheries, I understand that we need fish, we need to be
able to provide fish to other countries and things for our external exports but
surely we can find a way where we can balance our only take as much as we can
give. Only having your slice of the cake not taking the whole cake and
not going to go. Thank you so much Mia and thank you for your time and for
your and having being a voice for participating in the democratic process
that's awesome. So well done to you and a shout out to the students at
Taupo Nuiya Teah College. Thank you. Thank you.
Oh hi Rex, just need to take, turn your sound and mute yourself.
I'm trying to do it now. Can we do it for him?
I was sent and prompt to do it.
Got you.
We're all good. Okay, my name is Rex Chapman. I'm the captain of the
Sealwood fishing vessel Te Kao to Deepwater trawler 82 meter. I'm actually at
sea at the moment so I've got you on my phone. I've been a professional
fisherman fishing for 40 years and I support this bill and some of the
reasons why. I fish as an employee for Sealwood so and I fish efficiently and
with a strong focus on sustainability and utilizing our precious resources
carefully with the lightest footprint possible and you'll find most
professional fishermen of my level have, you know, we've got skin in the
game and we want that, you know. The New Zealand fisheries heavily regulated
and well managed. I've fished in lots of other countries in the
world. New Zealand is second to none in that respect. I heard someone
talking about we could learn lessons from Australia. I fish in Australia
and they're fairly comparable, you know, two systems over and one thing
that was different over there was they're allowed to discard quoted species
which I thought was a backward step when I first went over there until I was
talking to the observer one day and he says, so in New Zealand if you've got
a live quoted species that bycatch, you're not allowed to put it back in
the water again and release it alive. I said, no, we're not, you know.
So, you know, and that sort of made me think a bit more about that.
I hear the argument that science is done by the fishing industry and is not
independent and could be manipulated. I've done a lot of scientific voyages
in my career with SIRONIWA, Deepwater Group, independent scientists and
observers myself and the crews have put in many hours into stock assessment,
mitigation methods and many types of collection of data and biological
samples and filming behavior underwater to try and mitigate bycatch.
We put in hours, we live and breathe it out here. We're also involved in
programs of releasing species alive with tags to check survival rates of
release fish. We're best place to do the science because we're out
living on the ocean 12 months of the year and see it daily. Why would we
manipulate data when it affects the future of our future and our children's
lives? It's our livelihood. It's absurd to even think of it.
Myself and my colleagues, we get quite sick and tired of all the people
portraying the industry as greedy dishonest people who wish to destroy the
ocean and its biodiversity. I mean, why would we want to destroy our
livelihood and the future of all the young people coming through?
We protect it. We see things that no one else sees and we're best
to look at stuff. In reality, we're a lot of hard working honest professionals
who spend half our lives living on the sea providing good protein to feed
the world. We're heavily invested in the ocean and its sustainability for
our future futures and our families' futures. Most of us are also
recreational fishers as well. A lot of our opponents prey on emotion
and to make wild statements and catastrophize about the state of
the ocean with no science or evidence. As I've got older, I
look more for one thing, the truth. Good decisions can only be made
with good information and good science, whether in my job at sea or at a
government level. On the other side, decisions made with emotion and bad
information lead to bad outcomes and have unintended consequences to people.
I think cameras on vessels are a good thing. I don't think the public
should be available to see the footage. I don't think it's
should be the public need to be involved in the prosecution
or the sentiment against fishermen, but MPI should get the footage and if
there's anything wrong, they should prosecute the people. As it is now,
we have observers most of the time on the boat. I heard the observer
before saying about boats without observers catch less birds
and ones with them catch less. In saying that, there's no skin off my nose
to report everything I catch. It's law. You don't break the law by
catching a bird, but you break the law by not reporting it. It doesn't
affect me in any value or monetary or doesn't have any effect on me,
the company, they encourage me. I'd be in trouble if I didn't report it.
It's not what we do. We want to do that. From my point of view, I'd
rather release any species other than my target species alive if I could
back in the water. That goes a bit with the minimum size limits.
I sort of see it from the side. I see what that guy was saying before
if it couldn't be sold. I don't think people will ever target small
fish that I see. The deep water also is different to the inshore.
The stuff we catch, any small fish, if it's dead, it should be kept.
If it's alive, my view is it should be put back in the water
if it's likely to survive. There's no point putting dead stuff.
There's nothing of value for me in having small fish on board.
I don't get paid for it. I'd get towed off. I'd say,
what are you doing that? It's not what I do. It's morally wrong.
I wouldn't target small fish. It's good.
I hope you guys fully understand what the changes will mean
for good modern fisheries management. It's a bit more dynamic
than being able to change things at a more timely rate.
Yeah, that's about all. I hear a lot of stuff about
the depletion of fisheries and recreational. As I say,
we're outside the recreational eye.
We're deep water, so we're not really involved in that.
From where I live in Nelson, the snapper fishing has never been
so good in my lifetime. I've lived there all my life. It's incredible.
What I see is our stocks are well managed.
We're nearly at time, Rex, but Miles Anderson's got a quick question.
I'll just pass you over to Miles. Thanks, Rex.
I just would like your thoughts. There's been a lot of criticism
of bottom trawling by a number of submitters.
What are your thoughts? My thoughts are there's a lot of misinformation
on bottom trawling. It's 3% or something
of the bottom. We fish traditional areas that we've always fished.
The boat on my now, we predominantly mid-water fishing
most of the year. So a bit lighter footprint, but we still do bottom
trawl in areas where I've fished for probably 20 or 30 years
myself. So we're not dredging up loads of coral and killing by
diversity. The other thing I hear is that we're the only
nation in the high seas that's still
bottom trawls. Well, the high seas is outside New Zealand's 200 mile limit.
It's not inside New Zealand's 200 mile limit. It's a wee bit of a play
on words that one. I don't think there's many New Zealand boats
fishing outside the 200 mile limit anyway. Bottom trawlers now.
I think there's a lot of countries
in Korea and Russia and China. There's a lot of people
still doing that. Our practices are really good
in New Zealand. Like I say, I've been all over the world and seen other people's practices
and what we do here is very professional.
Thank you very much, Rex. And thank you for dialing in from the sea.
It's very cool. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you. You're up.
You can come up too.
Look at these two chairs.
It's probably heard in enough time to know how it
works. What's your name? Charlie.
Hi Charlie.
Hi. My name is Matthew Breach, and I'm here to speak against this bill.
I'm from Ngati Porou.
Although I come here with my Maori
Kaitiaki Poutaion, I also come here on behalf of
Zealanders and all those who love to see and get the kai to feed our families and communities.
I come here as a recreational fisherman of over 40 years and the son and the grandson of two passionate
recreational fishermen before me. I'm a primary school teacher and I've always brought the passion
of my and love of the sea into my classrooms. I'm a trainee skipper and a charter skipper
and the owner of a hunting and fishing tourism business as well and lastly I come here as the
father of a daughter who loves tangaroa and just as much as her dad.
You fit that all into a day.
Yeah I'm a busy man.
The fish in the kai moana of this country have always been public resource and it's one of the
most precious tonga we have. The fisheries of New Zealand are in crisis in my whole time. I've
seen scallop fisheries collapse, crayfish populations dwindle and once famous offshore reefs
become devoid of the degraded species that made them famous in the first place.
Over generations we've seen this decline for as long as I can remember other recreational
groups and the environmental activists have pleaded to successive governments and sadly the
response is usually to cut the recreational catch from six crayfish to three from 10 power to
five from 10 snapper to seven. Each time this happens we recreational fishermen grumble begrudgingly but
we eventually succumb because we want to do our part. What has been the ultimate kick in the
guts is that over that same time period we've seen commercial catch limits either stay the same
or increase. My specific parts of my written submission that I'd like to speak to today are
as follows. I would like to see access to free or affordable fish to all of our population
I'm not anti-commercial some of my best friends are commercial fishermen
but they are hamstrung by the low per kilo rate that they receive from the people who own the quota.
I have a friend who is a commercial fisherman and in his time he was paid 50 cents per kilo for
tarakihi and then somehow that turns into $40 a kilo in the supermarket I think there's a
mismatch there that we need to look at. Fish dumping I think that's the probably biggest problem we
have the stupidity of the whole scenario is beyond me and it's not currently just the undersized
fish that are getting dumped I have first-hand accounts from fishermen who are putting species
like yellowfin tuna back overboard because they're not the right shape size or weight.
Bottom trawling has to stop it's too destructive the research is clear and the rest of the world
was woken up to that. My recommendations is to feed New Zealand first and put profits last
as mentioned before this resource is all of ours and we all have to have a contribution on how
it's managed. I believe the ditching of the quota system needs to happen and we reinvent the wheel
rotating non-commercial take areas five years per region will with compensation for local fishermen
full transparency from big companies on methods practices introducing cameras
the benefits is honoring Te Te Riti for our Māori population health benefits for New
Zealanders with access to healthy food at a reasonable price increased biomass means
sustainable commercial methods can happen and families will participate more you want to get
your kid off an iPad give them a fishing rod or a snorkel and a mask. I heard the fisheries
minister speak to um this week that we need a bill of some sorts and on that I couldn't
agree more the only way to remedy the state of our ocean is through full public consultation
of all sectors and a raft of legislative changes that aren't based on a 40 year old system
not fit for purpose anymore to the minister of fisheries
your ancestors are watching and so are your moko how about you actually put New Zealand first
feed our own people and be the kaitiaki you're supposed to be
I'd like to finish with the o'haki of Te Warepāuri a local chief
I want to be good to my Māori and my Pākehā people
let the thunder of your voice reach me in the spirit land in this context we are future focused
are we future focused in our decision making are we considering the treasures of both Māori
and non-Maori and are we being good ancestors for the next generation let this be the
touchstone for your mahi here today
um thank you I've just got one quick question um thank you very much for your submission it was awesome
that you talked about your mate that was getting catching te rekehi for 50 cents a kilo
so was that a commercial arrangement yes so that was a that was a deal that he made with
the person that owned the quota that's how that's how it is for most so do you think the quack so that
that's not really a legislative issue do you think but do you think the quota system needs to change
that the people that don't that hold the quota should be using the voter to fish I think there
needs to be a way to get the food from the fishermen to the people without all the middle
people clipping the ticket so that everyone can get affordable seafood the health benefits to the
country would be massive I don't know you guys will catch the numbers and stuff like that but
can you imagine the obesity and the diabetes stuff if you can get reasonably priced seafood
I don't know so your mate owns the boat but the quote the person that owns the quota doesn't own
the boat he ended up giving up because it wasn't sustainable so he did own the boat he caught the
fish but um you know the incentive the the value for the fish he was getting was making it
non-profitable and so it ends up all just going back to big companies yeah yeah it's really interesting
all right thank you thank you so much
thank you nice to meet you
shall we
oh hi sorry Trish it's all right how are you I'm very good to the team my name is Trichray and I am here
because I'm concerned about our kids and our mokopuna will not enjoy the abundance from the ocean
that past generations have enjoyed if this bill progresses I want to tell you about three fisheries
not only abstract but three actual stocks in New Zealand waters that have been managed using the
same methods that this bill proposes to enshrine in law and I want to tell you what's happened
to them the first one is Tauraki one that's on the northeast coast for years catch per unit of effort
which is CPUE said the stock was manageable catch rates were holding and the model was okay
meanwhile independent trawl surveys the surveys that count actual fish rather than measure how
easily they are caught were showing a population in serious decline
scientists were raising the alarm but the CPUE signal said carry on and the stock did not carry on
and it's now fall into a level that will likely trigger an urgent review this year and catch
reductions that should have come years ago may now only come this year the window for easy recovery
has closed for that fishery then we talk about rock lobster crayfish on the northeast coast again
on the commission of fisheries in New Zealand an international panel of independent scientists
reviewed our management procedures in 2024 and explicitly warned against relying on CPUE
as the primary indicator of abundance the warning was documented it was on the record
and management procedures continued anyway the cray one stop has since collapsed there is now a
genuine scientific uncertainty whether it can recover to commercially viable levels within a generation
then we have blue nose a deep water stop slow to mature slow to reproduce and slow to recover
from pressure the kind of species for which the precautionary principle was invented the CPUE
data tracked well for an extended period the stock as independent surveys have shown
did not catch limits were set too high for too long and a slow reproducing species
has paid the price and the currency that it can barely afford years of future productivity
that's just three stocks using the same method and the same failure CPUE does not count fish it
measures how easily fish are caught so when a fleet becomes more experienced uses better technology
and becomes more skilled at finding the remaining fish in the shrinking population CPUE stays
stable yet the stock continues to fall scientists call this hyper stability it's not a new concept
and it's not disputed it's documented in international literature and it has now
been documented in our own waters with our own species and they're our own supposedly world
leading quota management system and the bill proposes to make CPUE based management procedures
the centerpiece of New Zealand fisheries management it proposes to automate catch limit decisions
based on an indicator with a proven tendency to miss stock collapses and it proposes to put
the rules governing those procedures into ministerial instruments below the level of
parliamentary scrutiny with a 20-day window for legal challenge so we've got taraki one
we've got crayfish one and we've got blue nose one these are not predictions they are on record
and the committee is being asked to legislate the same approach that produced these outcomes
and i'm asking you here today don't do that the evidence is already in the cost is already
being paid by the fish and by every new zealander who depends on healthy seas we need to kill the
bill thank you for your time um i'd have to say trish that was an exceptional submission
thank you very much and it was really informative and very passionate and heartfelt thank you
does anyone right she answered all yeah miles did have a question at one stage but you answered it
you answered it in the next couple of sentences um thank you very much thank you thank you
yeah yeah that's one for you
but you don't
i'll stay
less there's anyone
kodi
you got a kodi oh you just need to take your yourself off mute
perfect
very that's great welcome to the primary production select committee you've got five
minutes which goes pretty quickly so the floor is yours okay everyone my name is kodi hon my
recreational fisherman uh fisher in the harricky gulf a boat owner for 16 years and i've been out on the
water since i could crawl i was taught to fish by my father and i'm desperately trying to pass
those lessons on to my twin boys over these 16 years i've seen a heartbreaking decline
10 years ago i could shoot out after work for a quick fish in the ring of todo or monohi channels
and easily bring home a feed for my family today a whole weekend of effort often ends in a
struggle to find even one legal fish the biblical numbers of snapper the minister talks about
are a fantasy they certainly don't match the reality on my sounder or in my chili bin
i'm being locked out of 12 new high protection areas in the name of conservation i can accept that
but i cannot accept the blatant double standard that allows commercial ring meeting and trawling
to continue right next to or even within these zones it is a gut punch as a father
to tell him he can't take his kids fishing for a car why in these areas well a commercial boat
is allowed to come up and sweep up tons in the same spot if it's a nursery it should be
a nursery for everyone no exceptions no loopholes and absolutely no special treatment for industry
the bill reduces transparency by making it hard to see to see camera footage if the industry has
nothing to hide why lock the doors i know what happens when no one's watching growing up our
family came to why book out i vividly remember seeing commercial boats on the horizon near the
Henning chicken islands the next day the beach was covered in dead snapper
we spent the afternoon on the water in a trail of dead fish floating across the green bay
the old time was at the camp told me it was standard practice and that they if they catch a
fresher batch they dump the old stuff that scared me it showed me how careless and
wasteful these businesses can be i'm asking this committee to kill the bill at the very least
remove the loopholes that allow commercial mates to keep stripping the hpa's while families like mine
are restricted to other fish grounds don't let our hair your hair turns to be traded for commercial profit
thank you thank you very much ready do you have any questions got a question from marz Anderson
sure thanks for your submission kati um a couple of submitters talked about the
difference between inshore and deep-sea fisheries have you any insights into the difference of those
um like i'm not a professional fisherman i'm recreational yeah so from my point of view it's
just like i've seen the decline and like i just want to be able to go out and get a feed and take my
family out and have fun on the water um the hpa's and stuff i think are a great idea but like i say
it has to be for everyone you can't say that i can't fish there and then go get a magnet and
we'll trawl through there and take it all about so i'm just about being fair and um you know leave
it up to the professionals to to discuss what um you know what sort of quota limits and things like
that and obviously provide for the industry thanks kati awesome thank you very much for
taking the time to talk to us that's awesome right thank you very much see kati really appreciate it
right
so you have any